8. Commands from xboard to the engine

 All commands from xboard to the engine end with a newline (\n), even where that is not explicitly stated. All your output to xboard must be in complete lines; any form of prompt or partial line will cause problems. 

 At the beginning of each game, xboard sends an initialization string. This is currently "new\nrandom\n" unless the user changes it with the initString or secondInitString option. 

 xboard normally reuses the same chess engine process for multiple games. At the end of a game, xboard will send the "force" command (see below) to make sure your engine stops thinking about the current position. It will later send the initString again to start a new game. If your engine can't play multiple games, you can disable reuse  either with the "feature" command (beginning in protocol version 2; see below) or  with xboard's -xreuse (or -xreuse2) command line option. xboard will then ask the process to quit after each game and start a new process for the next game. 

xboard
This command will be sent once immediately after your engine process is started. You can use it to put your engine into "xboard mode" if that is needed. If your engine prints a prompt to ask for user input, you must turn off the prompt and output a newline when the "xboard" command comes in. 
protover N

Beginning in protocol version 2 (in which N=2), this command will be sent immediately after the "xboard" command. If you receive some other command immediately after "xboard" (such as "new"), you can assume that protocol version 1 is in use. The "protover" command is the only new command that xboard always sends in version 2. All other new commands to the engine are sent only if the engine first enables them with the "feature" command. Protocol versions will always be simple integers so that they can easily be compared. 

Your engine should reply to the protover command by sending the "feature" command (see below) with the list of non-default feature settings that you require, if any.

Your engine should never refuse to run due to receiving a higher protocol version number than it is expecting! New protocol versions will always be compatible with older ones by default; the larger version number is simply a hint that additional "feature" command options added in later protocol versions may be accepted. 
accepted
rejected
 These commands may be sent to your engine in reply to the "feature" command; see its documentation below. 

new
Reset the board to the standard chess starting position. Set White on move. Leave force mode and set the engine to play Black. Associate the engine's clock with Black and the opponent's clock with White. Reset clocks and time controls to the start of a new game. Use wall clock for time measurement. Stop clocks. Do not ponder on this move, even if pondering is on. Remove any search depth limit previously set by the sd command. 
variant VARNAME
If the game is not standard chess, but a variant, this command is sent after "new" and before the first move or "edit" command. Currently defined variant names are: wildcastle	Shuffle chess where king can castle from d file
nocastle	Shuffle chess with no castling at all
fischerandom	Fischer Random
bughouse	Bughouse, ICC/FICS rules
crazyhouse	Crazyhouse, ICC/FICS rules
losers	Win by losing all pieces or getting mated (ICC)
suicide	Win by losing all pieces including king, or by having fewer pieces when one player has no legal moves (FICS)
giveaway	Win by losing all pieces including king, or by having no legal moves (ICC)
twokings	Weird ICC wild 9
kriegspiel	Kriegspiel (engines not supported)
atomic	Atomic
3check	Win by giving check 3 times
xiangqi 	Chinese Chess (9x10 board)
shogi 	Japanese Chess (9x9 bord)
capablanca	Capablanca Chess (10x8 board, with Archbishop and Chancellor)
gothic 	Gothic Chess (10x8 board, same with better opening setup)
falcon 	Falcon Chess (10x8 board, with two Falcon pieces)
shatranj 	ancient Arabic Chess, with Elephants and General in stead of B and Q
courier 	Courier Chess (12x8 board, a medieval precursor of modern Chess
knightmate 	King moves as Knight and vice versa
berolina	 Pawns capture straight ahead, and move diagonally
janus	 Janus Chess (10x8, with two Archbishops)
caparandom 	shuffle variant like FRC (10x8 board)
cylinder 	Pieces wrap around between side edges, like board is a cylinder
super 	Superchess: a shuffle variant with 4 fairy pieces on 8x8 board
great 	Great Shatranj: sliders are replaced by corresponding short-range pieces on a 10x8 board
lion 	Mighty-Lion Chess, with a super-knight, more powerful than a Queen
elven 	Elven Chess: hybrid between Chess and Chu Shogi on 10x10 board
chu 	Chu Shogi: Edo-period Japanese Chess on a 12x12 board
unknown	Unknown variant (not supported)

As of XBoard 4.8, engines can define arbitrary variant names; see the "feature" and "setup" commands in section 9. 

quit
The chess engine should immediately exit. This command is used when xboard is itself exiting, and also between games if the -xreuse command line option is given (or -xreuse2 for the second engine). See also Signals above. 

random
This command is specific to GNU Chess 4. You can either ignore it completely (that is, treat it as a no-op) or implement it as GNU Chess does. The command toggles "random" mode (that is, it sets random = !random). In random mode, the engine adds a small random value to its evaluation function to vary its play. The "new" command sets random mode off. 

force
Set the engine to play neither color ("force mode"). Stop clocks. The engine should check that moves received in force mode are legal and made in the proper turn, but should not think, ponder, or make moves of its own. 

go
Leave force mode and set the engine to play the color that is on move. Associate the engine's clock with the color that is on move, the opponent's clock with the color that is not on move. Start the engine's clock. Start thinking and eventually make a move. 

playother
 (This command is new in protocol version 2. It is not sent unless you enable it with the feature command.) Leave force mode and set the engine to play the color that is not on move. Associate the opponent's clock with the color that is on move, the engine's clock with the color that is not on move. Start the opponent's clock. If pondering is enabled, the engine should begin pondering. If the engine later receives a move, it should start thinking and eventually reply. 

white
 (This command is obsolete as of protocol version 2, but is still sent in some situations to accommodate older engines unless you disable it with the feature command.)  Set White on move. Set the engine to play Black. Stop clocks. 

black 
 (This command is obsolete as of protocol version 2, but is still sent in some situations to accommodate older engines unless you disable it with the feature command.)  Set Black on move. Set the engine to play White. Stop clocks. 

level MPS BASE INC
Set time controls. See the Time Control section below. 

st TIME
Set time controls. See the Time Control section below. 

sd DEPTH

The engine should limit its thinking to DEPTH ply. The commands "level" or "st" and "sd" can be used together in an orthogonal way. If both are issued, the engine should observe both limitations: In the protocol, the "sd" command isn't a time control. It doesn't say that your engine has unlimited time but must search to exactly the given depth. It says that you should pay attention to the time control as normal, but cut off the search at the specified depth even if you have time to search deeper. If you don't have time to search to the specified depth, given your normal time management algorithm, then you will want to stop sooner than the given depth. 

 The "new" command should set the search depth back to unlimited. This is already stated in the spec. The "level" command should not affect the search depth. As it happens, xboard/WinBoard currently always sends sd (if needed) right after level, but that isn't part of the spec.
nps NODE_RATE
The engine should not use wall-clock time to make its timing decisions, but an own internal time measure based on the number of nodes it has searched (and will report as "thinking output", see section 10), converted to seconds through dividing by the given NODE_RATE. Example: after receiving the commands "st 8" and "nps 10000", the engine should never use more that 80,000 nodes in the search for any move. In this mode, the engine should report user CPU time used (in its thinking output), rather than wall-clock time. This even holds if NODE_RATE is given as 0, but in that case it should also use the user CPU time for its timing decisions. The effect of an "nps" command should persist until the next "new" command. 
time N
Set a clock that always belongs to the engine. N is a number in centiseconds (units of 1/100 second). Even if the engine changes to playing the opposite color, this clock remains with the engine. 
otim N

Set a clock that always belongs to the opponent. N is a number in centiseconds (units of 1/100 second). Even if the opponent changes to playing the opposite color, this clock remains with the opponent. 

 If needed for purposes of board display in force mode (where the engine is not participating in the game) the time clock should be associated with the last color that the engine was set to play, the otim clock with the opposite color. 

This business of "clocks remaining with the engine" is apparently so ambiguous that many engines implement it wrong. The clocks in fact always remain with the color. Which clock reading is relayed with "time", and which by "otim", is determined by which side the engine plays. Note that the way the clocks operate and receive extra time (in accordance with the selected time control) is not affected in any way by which moves are made by the engine, which by the opponent, and which were forced. 

 Beginning in protocol version 2, if you can't handle the time and otim commands, you can use the "feature" command to disable them; see below.  The following techniques from older protocol versions also work: You can ignore the time and otim commands (that is, treat them as no-ops), or send back "Error (unknown command): time" the first time you see "time". 
MOVE

See below for the syntax of moves. If the move is illegal, print an error message; see the section "Commands from the engine to xboard". If the move is legal and in turn, make it. If not in force mode, stop the opponent's clock, start the engine's clock, start thinking, and eventually make a move. 

 When xboard sends your engine a move, it normally sends coordinate algebraic notation. Examples: Normal moves:	e2e4
Pawn promotion:	e7e8q
Castling:	e1g1, e1c1, e8g8, e8c8
Bughouse/crazyhouse drop:	P@h3
ICS Wild 0/1 castling:	d1f1, d1b1, d8f8, d8b8
FischerRandom castling:	O-O, O-O-O (oh, not zero)
Multi-leg move:	c4d5,d5e4 (legs separated by comma)
Null move:	@@@@


 Note that on boards with exactly 10 ranks, counting of the ranks starts at 0. 

 Beginning in protocol version 2, you can use the feature command to select SAN (standard algebraic notation) instead; for example, e4, Nf3, exd5, Bxf7+, Qxf7#, e8=Q, O-O, or P@h3. Note that the last form, P@h3, is a extension to the PGN standard's definition of SAN, which does not support bughouse or crazyhouse. 

 xboard doesn't reliably detect illegal moves, because it does not keep track of castling unavailability due to king or rook moves, or en passant availability. If xboard sends an illegal move, send back an error message so that xboard can retract it and inform the user; see the section "Commands from the engine to xboard". 
usermove MOVE
 By default, moves are sent to the engine without a command name; the notation is just sent as a line by itself. Beginning in protocol version 2, you can use the feature command to cause the command name "usermove" to be sent before the move. Example: "usermove e2e4". 

?

Move now. If your engine is thinking, it should move immediately; otherwise, the command should be ignored (treated as a no-op). It is permissible for your engine to always ignore the ? command. The only bad consequence is that xboard's Move Now menu command will do nothing. 

 It is also permissible for your engine to move immediately if it gets any command while thinking, as long as it processes the command right after moving, but it's preferable if you don't do this. For example, xboard may send post, nopost, easy, hard, force, quit,  or other commands  while the engine is on move. 

ping N

In this command, N is a decimal number. When you receive the command, reply by sending the string pong N, where N is the same number you received. Important: You must not reply to a "ping" command until you have finished executing all commands that you received before it. Pondering does not count; if you receive a ping while pondering, you should reply immediately and continue pondering. Because of the way xboard uses the ping command, if you implement the other commands in this protocol, you should never see a "ping" command when it is your move; however, if you do, you must not send the "pong" reply to xboard until after you send your move. For example, xboard may send "?" immediately followed by "ping". If you implement the "?" command, you will have moved by the time you see the subsequent ping command. Similarly, xboard may send a sequence like "force", "new", "ping". You must not send the pong response until after you have finished executing the "new" command and are ready for the new game to start. 

 The ping command is new in protocol version 2 and will not be sent unless you enable it with the "feature" command. Its purpose is to allow several race conditions that could occur in previous versions of the protocol to be fixed, so it is highly recommended that you implement it. It is especially important in simple engines that do not ponder and do not poll for input while thinking, but it is needed in all engines. 
draw
The engine's opponent offers the engine a draw. To accept the draw, send "offer draw". To decline, ignore the offer (that is, send nothing). If you're playing on ICS, it's possible for the draw offer to have been withdrawn by the time you accept it, so don't assume the game is over because you accept a draw offer. Continue playing until xboard tells you the game is over. See also "offer draw" below. 
result RESULT {COMMENT}
After the end of each game, xboard will send you a result command. You can use this command to trigger learning. RESULT is either 1-0, 0-1, 1/2-1/2, or *, indicating whether white won, black won, the game was a draw, or the game was unfinished. The COMMENT string is purely a human-readable comment; its content is unspecified and subject to change. In ICS mode, it is passed through from ICS uninterpreted. Example: 
result 1-0 {White mates}

 Here are some notes on interpreting the "result" command. Some apply only to playing on ICS ("Zippy" mode). 

 If you won but did not just play a mate, your opponent must have resigned or forfeited. If you lost but were not just mated, you probably forfeited on time, or perhaps the operator resigned manually. If there was a draw for some nonobvious reason, perhaps your opponent called your flag when he had insufficient mating material (or vice versa), or perhaps the operator agreed to a draw manually. 

 You will get a result command even if you already know the game ended -- for example, after you just checkmated your opponent. In fact, if you send the "RESULT {COMMENT}" command (discussed below), you will simply get the same thing fed back to you with "result" tacked in front. You might not always get a "result *" command, however. In particular, you won't get one in local chess engine mode when the user stops playing by selecting Reset, Edit Game, Exit or the like. 

setboard FEN

 The setboard command is the new way to set up positions, beginning in protocol version 2. It is not used unless it has been selected with the feature command. Here FEN is a position in Forsythe-Edwards Notation, as defined in the PGN standard. Note that this PGN standard referred to here only applies to normal Chess; Obviously in variants that cannot be described by a FEN for normal Chess, e.g. because the board is not 8x8, other pieces then PNBRQK participate, there are holdings that need to be specified, etc., xboard will use a FEN format that is standard or suitable for that variant. In particular, in FRC or CRC, WinBoard will use Shredder-FEN or X-FEN standard, i.e. it can use the rook-file indicator letter to represent a castling right (like HAha) whenever it wants, but if it uses KQkq, this will always refer to the outermost rook on the given side. 

Illegal positions: Note that either setboard or edit can be used to send an illegal position to the engine. The user can create any position with xboard's Edit Position command (even, say, an empty board, or a board with 64 white kings and no black ones). If your engine receives a position that it considers illegal, I suggest that you send the response "tellusererror Illegal position", and then respond to any attempted move with "Illegal move" until the next new, edit, or setboard command. 

edit

 The edit command is the old way to set up positions. For compatibility with old engines, it is still used by default, but new engines may prefer to use the feature command (see below) to cause xboard to use setboard instead.  The edit command puts the chess engine into a special mode, where it accepts the following subcommands:c	change current piece color, initially white
Pa4 (for example)	place pawn of current color on a4
xa4 (for example)	empty the square a4 (not used by xboard)
#	clear board
.	leave edit mode


 See the Idioms section below for additional subcommands used in ChessBase's implementation of the protocol. 

The edit command does not change the side to move. To set up a black-on-move position, xboard uses the following command sequence: 
    new
    force
    a2a3
    edit
    <edit commands>
    .

 This sequence is used to avoid the "black" command, which is now considered obsolete and which many engines never did implement as specified in this document. 

 After an edit command is complete, if a king and a rook are on their home squares, castling is assumed to be available to them. En passant capture is assumed to be illegal on the current move regardless of the positions of the pawns. The clock for the 50 move rule starts at zero, and for purposes of the draw by repetition rule, no prior positions are deemed to have occurred.  In FRC or CRC, any rook and king put on the back rank should be considered to have castling rights, even if it later becomes apparent that they cannot be both in the initial position, because the position just set up is asymmetric. It is upto WinBoard to find work-around in cases where this is not desired, similar to the "black kludge" shown above, by setting up an earlier position, and then do a move to destroy castling rights or create e.p. rights. (Don't bet your life on it...) 
hint
If the user asks for a hint, xboard sends your engine the command "hint". Your engine should respond with "Hint: xxx", where xxx is a suggested move. If there is no move to suggest, you can ignore the hint command (that is, treat it as a no-op). 
bk
If the user selects "Book" from the xboard menu, xboard will send your engine the command "bk". You can send any text you like as the response, as long as each line begins with a blank space or tab (\t) character, and you send an empty line at the end. The text pops up in a modal information dialog. 

undo
If the user asks to back up one move, xboard will send you the "undo" command. xboard will not send this command without putting you in "force" mode first, so you don't have to worry about what should happen if the user asks to undo a move your engine made. (GNU Chess 4 actually switches to playing the opposite color in this case.) 

remove
If the user asks to retract a move, xboard will send you the "remove" command. It sends this command only when the user is on move. Your engine should undo the last two moves (one for each player) and continue playing the same color. 

hard
Turn on pondering (thinking on the opponent's time, also known as "permanent brain"). xboard will not make any assumption about what your default is for pondering or whether "new" affects this setting. 

easy
Turn off pondering.

post
Turn on thinking/pondering output. See Thinking Output section.

nopost
Turn off thinking/pondering output.

analyze
Enter analyze mode. See Analyze Mode section.

name X 
This command informs the engine of its opponent's name. When the engine is playing on a chess server, xboard obtains the opponent's name from the server.  When the engine is playing locally against a human user, xboard obtains the user's login name from the local operating system. When the engine is playing locally against another engine, xboard uses either the other engine's filename or the name that the other engine supplied in the myname option to the feature command. By default, xboard uses the name command only when the engine is playing on a chess server. Beginning in protocol version 2, you can change this with the name option to the feature command; see below. 

rating
In ICS mode, xboard obtains the ICS opponent's rating from the "Creating:" message that appears before each game. (This message may not appear on servers using outdated versions of the FICS code.) In Zippy mode, it sends these ratings on to the chess engine using the "rating" command. The chess engine's own rating comes first, and if either opponent is not rated, his rating is given as 0.  In the future this command may also be used in other modes, if ratings are known.  Example: 
rating 2600 1500
ics HOSTNAME
 If HOSTNAME is "-", the engine is playing against a local opponent; otherwise, the engine is playing on an Internet Chess Server (ICS) with the given hostname. This command is new in protocol version 2 and is not sent unless the engine has enabled it with the "feature" command. Example: "ics freechess.org" 

computer
The opponent is also a computer chess engine. Some engines alter their playing style when they receive this command. 

pause

resume
(These commands are new in protocol version 2 and will not be sent unless feature pause=1 is set. At this writing, xboard actually does not use the commands at all, but it or other interfaces may use them in the future.) The "pause" command puts the engine into a special state where it does not think, ponder, or otherwise consume significant CPU time. The current thinking or pondering (if any) is suspended and both player's clocks are stopped. The only command that the interface may send to the engine while it is in the paused state is "resume". The paused thinking or pondering (if any) resumes from exactly where it left off, and the clock of the player on move resumes running from where it stopped. 

memory N
 This command informs the engine on how much memory it is allowed to use maximally, in MegaBytes. On receipt of this command, the engine should adapt the size of its hash tables accordingly. This command does only fix the total memory use, the engine has to decide for itself (or be configured by the user by other means) how to divide up the available memory between the various tables it wants to use (e.g. main hash, pawn hash, tablebase cache, bitbases). This command will only be sent to engines that have requested it through the memory feature, and only at the start of a game, as the first of the commands to relay engine option settings just before each "new" command. 

cores N
 This command informs the engine on how many CPU cores it is allowed to use maximally. This could be interpreted as the number of search threads for SMP engines. (Threads that do not consume significant amounts of CPU time, like I/O threads, need not be included in the count.) This command will only be sent to engines that have requested it through the smp feature. The engine should be able to respond to the "cores" command any time during a game, but it is allowed to finish a search in progress before procesing the command. (Obeying the command should take priority over finishing a ponder search, though.) In any case it will be sent at the start of every game as the last command to relay engine option settings before the "new" command. 

egtpath TYPE PATH
 This command informs the engine in which directory (given by the PATH argument) it can find end-game tables of the specified TYPE. The TYPE argument can be any character string which does not contain spaces. Currently nalimov and scorpio are defined types, for Nalimov tablebases and Scorpio bitbases, respectively, but future developers of other formats are free to define their own format names. The GUI simply matches the TYPE names the engine says it supports with those that the user supplied when configuring xboard. For every match, it sends a separate "y" command. The PATH argument would normally (for Nalimov) be the pathname of the directory the EGT files are in, but could also be the name of a file, or in fact anything the particular EGT type requires. It is upto the developer of the EGT format to specify the syntax of this parameter. This command will only be sent to engines that have told the GUI they support EGTs of the given TYPE through the egt feature. It will be sent at the start of each game, before the "new" command. 

option NAME[=VALUE]
 This command changes the setting of the option NAME defined by the engine (through an earlier feature command) to the given VALUE. XBoard will in general have no idea what the option means, and will send the command only when a user changes the value of this option through a menu, or at startup of the engine (before the first 'cores' command or, if that is not sent, the first 'new' command) in reaction to command-line options. The NAME echoes back to the engine the string that was identified as an option NAME in the feature command defining the option. The VALUE is of the type (numeric or text or absent) that was implied by the option type specified in this feature command, i.e. with 'spin' and 'check' options VALUE will be a decimal integer (in the latter case 0 or 1), with 'combo' and 'string' options VALUE will be a text string, and with 'button' and 'save' options no VALUE will be sent at all. 
exclude MOVE
include MOVE
exclude all
include all
 These commands change the set of moves that the engine should consider in the root node of its search, by removing or adding the mentioned MOVE from this set. After reaching a new position, (e.g. through a usermove, undo, new or setboard command), or after receiving "include all", this set should always be reset to all legal moves from that position. If the set of moves changes during a search, the engine could start a new search from scratch, or it can try to be smart, and continue the current search with the new set of moves (e.g. after exclusion of a move that has not been searched yet in the current iteration). After "exclude all", the engine would have no legal moves in the root, which logically should make it behave as if it is (stale)mated, but it is allowed to defer any effects of this command on a search in progress to when the set gets non-empty again through addition of a move. These commands will only be sent to engines that have requested such through the exclude feature. 
setscore SCORE DEPTH
 This command instructs the engine to treat future search requests on the current position (also when it is encountered inside a larger search tree) upto the given DEPTH as if these result is SCORE centi-Pawn in favor of the side that has the move in this position. It is entirely up to the engine to decide when the effect of this option should expire. (E.g. it could last upto the next "new" or "quit" command, or even into future sessions until the user explicitly clears it through an engine-defined option.) This command will only be sent to engines that have requested it through the setscore feature. 
lift SQUARE
put SQUARE
hover SQUARE
 These commands are only important for variants the GUI does not know the rules of, and keep the engine aware of how the user is manipulating pieces in the GUI, so that it can supply relevant rule information. The "lift" command is sent by the GUI when the user 'picks up' (or selects) a piece from the mentioned SQUARE, so that the engine can reply with a "highlight" command to mark the squares where that piece can move to. The "put" command similarly indicates where the user releases that piece; as the GUI clears the highlights on that event by itself, usually no engine response would be required. The "hover" command is sent whenever the mouse pointer enters a square that is currently marked in red, (reserved for captures) so that the engine can (optionally) reply with a "highlight" command to mark victims of non-standard capture (such as e.p. capture in Chess, or jump capture in Checkers) when the user would move the currently selected piece there. These commands will only be sent to engines that have requested such through the highlight feature. 
Bughouse commands:

 xboard now supports bughouse engines when in Zippy mode. See zippy.README for information on Zippy mode and how to turn on the bughouse support. The bughouse move format is given above. xboard sends the following additional commands to the engine when in bughouse mode. Commands to inform your engine of the partner's game state may be added in the future. 
partner <player>
<player> is now your partner for future games. Example: 
partner mann
partner
Meaning: You no longer have a partner. 
ptell <text>
Your partner told you <text>, either with a ptell or an ordinary tell. 
holding [<white>] [<black>]
White currently holds <white>; black currently holds <black>. Example: 
holding [PPPRQ] []
holding [<white>] [<black>] <color><piece>
White currently holds <white>; black currently holds <black>, after <color> acquired <piece>. Example: 
holding [PPPRQ] [R] BR